Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host as always Ricardo Loops. And
today I'm joined by Doctor Erica Cartmill. She's Professor
of Cognitive Science, anthropology and animal behavior at Indiana
University. She studies the acquisition and evolution of human
language. And she is particularly interested in whether gestures
play the role in the origins of human language.
And today we're going to talk a lot about
the evolution of gestures and human language, of course.
So Doctor Cartmill, welcome to the show. It's a
pleasure to everyone.
Thank you so much, Ricardo. I really appreciate you
inviting me on. I'm, I'm very excited to talk
with you and, and all of your listeners.
Great. So let's start with gestures then. And I
guess that since we're doing this from an evolutionary
perspective, mostly, do we know how old are gestures
from an evolutionary perspective?
Yeah. So it's a great question. I, I mean,
I, I think it's a little bit, it's a
little bit tricky to answer because we see gestures
a widely across the animal kingdom. So, you know,
I think in terms of a type of communication,
it's kind of like asking how old is vocalization,
right? Lots of animals vocalize dogs, bark, crows, caw,
et cetera, et cetera. Um All of those involve
vibrations of the vocal chords and similarly, um lots
of different animal species use their bodies to communicate,
right. So birds will, will raise wings sometimes in
elaborate displays. Um Some, you know, blue footed boobies,
like the ones in the Galapagos Island will raise
1 ft at a time in a little dance
to sort of show off my foot, show off
my other foot. You could call those gestures. They're
bodily movements that communicate with other um with other
animals. However, the things that, that humans and other
apes are doing seem to go one step beyond
that. So we're using our hands in, in our,
our arms and to some extent also our, our
bodies and our faces to, to communicate in very
flexible, very intentional ways. And I know we'll get
into that in a little bit later. I just
wanted to sort of say that like in terms
of bodily communication, that's something that you see everywhere.
Um When we talk specifically about the origin of
human, of human language and human gestures, that's where
we wanted to think about. What do we see
in the other great apes. Humans are a great
ape. We also have chimpanzees and bonobos and gorillas
and, and orangutans. And um and all of those
species also use gesture and they gesture in ways
that are very similar in some important ways to
humans. I know we're gonna talk more about that.
So I don't want to sort of give everything
away at the start, but that humanlike gesture, the
sort of roots of humanlike gesture, I think are
at least 12 or 13 million years old because
that's how, um that's how long ago the lineage
that, that resulted in modern orangutans um diverged from
the lineage that resulted in modern humans. And so,
since we see something, since we see these same
qualities of gesture across all of the great apes,
we can, we can infer that our last common
ancestor also had those same properties of gesture.
So we're focusing here mostly on great apes, right?
That's
orangutans, gorillas, chimpanzees, bonobos, monin,
right? Yeah. So, so that's what my work focuses
on. There are people who, who study gesture and
other animals. And I think it's a really interesting
question of, you know, are their gestures different from
the gestures we see in, in great apes and
in humans. Um I, I think I can speak
sort of from an expert perspective um about the
great apes. I'm a little, I, I can sort
of, you know, maybe be a li a sort
of a general consumer like plus a little bit
if we're talking about gestures in, you know, birds
and fish.
No, but one of the aspects that you mentioned
there that I find very interesting. Uh AND that
is, it's basically an important clarification is the fact
that animals can actually gesture with different parts of
their bodies and not just the arms, the hands
or the fingers. Because when we colloquially talk about
gestures, I guess that what people are usually thinking
about is what you do mainly with your hands.
Right.
Absolutely. Yeah. So I think, you know, when we're
talking about human gesture, people are, are typically thinking
about the hands. Um, YOU know, even, and even
gesture researchers who, you know, sort of think broadly
about gesture. If you, you know, are designing a
logo for a gesture conference or a gesture lab,
it's always hands, right? I mean, we're like hands,
hands, hands, we make a lot of and jokes,
you know, oh let me go out on a
limb or hand it to you or, right. So,
you know, like, oh there was the evidence points
to this, right? I mean, we, there are a
lot of hand jokes. Um BUT uh but you
uh humans are also gesture with, with all different
parts of their body. So you think about and
if I'm holding a cup of coffee and you
ask me where something is. Um YOU know, if,
if I'm holding something, I might use my head
to, to suggest where it is, I'll be like,
oh, it's, you know, it's over there. I might
use my chin to point, I might use my
head to tilt, might use my elbow. Um There
are also some beautiful work that shows that people
with limb differences say you're, you're born missing arms
or you had an accident. Um People will use
their, you know, can use their feet in ways
that are very similar to their hands. And so
I think that the spontaneous sort of most like
first point of articulation, the plan A, I guess
when it comes to human gesture is to use
your hands. But um, gesture, I think is not
something that's limited to the hands. I think gesture
is, you know, is a compulsion. It's something that
we want to do, we want to communicate with
our bodies. And if your hands aren't available, you'll
use other parts of your body.
So let's perhaps take just a small step back.
Uh JUST for me to ask you an even
more basic question. So what are gestures, then what
counts as a gesture? Exactly, because it's not just
moving one of your limbs or your body in
a particular way? Right. I mean, I, it entails
some sort of communication at least.
Right. Absolutely. And I think this is where actually
people who study humans and people who study nonhuman,
great apes uh tend to have slightly different definitions.
And I think that's just because it's harder when
you're studying an animal of a different species, it's
harder to, to make inferences about um their behavior.
It's harder to understand it in a way you're
on the outside looking in, right? And so when
you see another human communicating, um you, you have
stronger intuitions about what they're doing. And um and
oftentimes that's good sometimes you have to like, check
your intuitions and say maybe they're doing something else,
but often, often we use those intuitions as scientists
um to sort of start our, our inquiry. Um
So this is just a point where sort of
my two hats because I work on, on, you
know, gesture and great apes, but also gesture in
humans. And so I have to sort of say
like, well, which hat am I wearing right now?
We're also a great tape. Right.
Right. And, and, and yes, thank you for, thank
you for bringing that up because I, I certainly,
I use the term great apes to mean nonhuman,
great apes actually. Yeah, just, just because, you know,
it gets a little wordy is a mouthful. Um
But that's absolutely right. And really important to emphasize,
humans are a great ape. And, you know, that's
why it's not surprising when we see commonalities between
us and other great apes. But in a way
we're also the most distinctive great ape. You know,
we have, we sort of have what other apes
have, but then we have a bunch of other
weird stuff on top of that. Um And so
when, so just to come back to your question
about what defines a gesture, you know, if you're,
um I would say there's broad sort of broad
agreement about kind of a an area of things.
But then specific definitions really differ from study to
study. So for example, some people, some human gesture
researchers define gesture as movements of the hand and
arm um that are used in communication with other,
with other people. So they occur during conversation during
you know, interaction, they're communicative in nature and their
movements of the hand and arm. Other people expand
that to include the upper body. Other people, you
know, other people might only use the hands and
arm and face. Other people include any part of
the body as long as it's used in a
communicative manner um with another person. And so, um
but not all gesture happens during communication. And so
that's where it gets tricky because I think what
started as something as a topic for people to
study um this additional part of communication, it's not
just speech, it's also we're doing all these things
with our bodies. How does that communicate? Why are
we doing it? Um You know, does it have
specific forms? Does it vary culturally? All of these
things are very rich um questions that people have,
have tackled about gesture. But sort of once people
started studying gesture, you realize it doesn't always happen
in conversation. You know, if you're thinking through a
complicated math problem, you will sometimes use your hands
to visualize things for yourself. So gesture can also
be things that you're, and it isn't just math.
I mean, if you're thinking about, you know, I'm
sure any of your, any of your viewers, if
they're like, OK, I'm gonna close my eyes and
I'm gonna think about how I get from, you
know, my house to my office or my house
to my school. Right. And it's like, ok, I'm
gonna go here, I'm gonna turn, you know, there's
this intersection or in your gestures might be small.
Um They're, they're not showy, they're not, you know,
trying to reach someone in the distance. But nevertheless,
the, the things that you do with your hands
can really help your recall, they can help your
memory, they can help, um you know, they can
help you externalize things in the same way that
if, if you were writing something on a piece
of paper. And so, you know, so yes, gestures
are communicative, but at least in humans, they don't
have to be. Um And so in human gesture
research, there's a really interesting divide between talking about
gestures as communication and gestures as cognition. And so
even when you're communicating with another person, um a
lot of the gestures that speakers are doing are
helping them talk. And so they're actually, there's really
interesting work where if I realize I've sort of
gone off on a tangent, I apologize. I will
finish up soon. I promise him. But
you're giving away some of our late later. Oh,
no,
I'll stop. Um Anyway, I will try to, I'll
try to limit myself to the questions you ask.
I just get excited. And um and then, you
know, I'm like, I'm like, oh, I'm gesturing that
reminds me of something else. Um All right, I,
I will limit myself. But um but to, to
answer to come back to your actual question you
asked about what is a gesture? I think it
really depends on whether you're studying human gesture or
you're studying ape gesture. Um Human gesture allows for
the possibility that gestures can be for the person
who is gesturing, right? That like it's helping me
think it's helping me reason, it's helping me talk.
Um It's also helping you understand. But a lot
of the things that I'm doing with my hands
are for me, not just for you with apes.
We, we don't sort of allow that possibility and,
and that's because we can't, we can't study those
or it's, it's not that we can't, it's very
difficult to ask those questions about whether gestures are
helping apes. Um THINK it's much easier to ask,
still difficult, but it's much easier to ask whether
um gestures are helping apes communicate with others. So
with ape gesture, we're looking at a really a
small subset of all of the things they do
with their hands. So they have to be and
we'll come, I, I will not jump ahead, but
we're looking for intentional movements that are done to
communicate with another individual. So if you, if I
produce a movement and, you know, maybe I'm waving
my hand and I'm doing it to you in,
in an interaction, say a greeting. Um You don't
see this in apes, but I'm just giving a
human example. Um uh I mean, you do see
it but not as a greeting in this way.
Sorry. It's too many things anyway, if I, if
I do something it's directed towards you and then
I do the movement on my own later on
as a gesture, researchers studying apes, we don't include
that in our data because we're not confident that
it's intending to communicate with another individual, a human
researcher would definitely include it.
So just to clarify one aspect here, since we're
addressing these from an evolutionary perspective, and I guess
that phylogenetic speaking, these would be relevant. So when
you talk about human gestures, are you referring exclusively
to Homo sapiens or also to the rest of
the homogenous? And if so, are you interested in
other Monin and even Omid that came prior to
uh the homogenous? I mean, from Homo Erectus forward
or not?
Yeah. Um That's a, that's a great question. I,
I mean, I'm certainly interested uh it's, it's very
hard to say what are, are, you know, earlier
ancestors in the human lineage did. Um I'm specifically
talking about modern humans about Homo sapiens. Um It's
very possible and I would say likely that some
of the features that are unique to human gesture
today were also present um in earlier Homo species.
But um you know, that they evolved after uh
that the, you know, the lineage that, that evolved
into humans split from um from the lineages that,
that evolved into um the other great apes. However,
it's very hard to, to date when those changes
might have occurred. So, um I think that that
there are certainly features of gesture that sorry, they're
features of human gesture that I think could not
have been possible until humans had a much more
um representational sort of illustrative mind. And I think
that there's evidence for that kind of mind in
cave art in, you know, early carvings. And you
know, the things that we typically think may be
markers of language, those are certainly, I think also
markers of the kind of complicated gestures you see
today. Um The hard thing is saying how much
earlier would humanlike gesture have evolved?
Yeah, I guess that the uh what you just
mentioned that already points to another aspect that we
might come back to later on in our conversation.
But uh there is the fact that the gestures
we use uh do not depend exclusively on the
kinds of things that you ana anatomy allows you
to do. I mean the kinds of movements that
we can do with our fingers, hands and so
on, but also with our own cognition, right? I
mean, perhaps there are gestures that we, that we
can do because we can cognitively process specific kinds
of information. And perhaps if other animals would have
hands like ours, maybe they wouldn't produce the same
gestures due to some cognitive limitations. Is that it?
Absolutely. Yeah. I mean, and I think, um, do
you want me to answer that now, or do
you want to come back to that?
No, no answer that now. Yes. And then it
will have other implications for some other things we
might talk about later.
Yeah. OK, good. I learned my lesson though. Um
So, you know, so I think that that one
of the reasons that that ape gesture is such
an interesting topic. I mean, I think it's many
reasons, it's an interesting topic. But one of the
reasons is that ape gestural communication, it seems to
be much closer to human commu to human gesture
than ape vocalization is to human speech. And you
know, and in experiments very far away from what
apes are doing naturally. But you know, if you
take a chimpanzee and you raise them in close
contact with humans and you try to teach them
speech and you try to teach them um you
know, uh a manual communication system like a modified
version of American sign language, they'll learn a lot
of the sign language, they won't learn the speech.
And that is really a physiological limitation, right? That
we know that their minds can acquire symbols, they
can acquire keyboard symbols, they can acquire manual symbols.
Um BUT they have limitations in their vocal learning,
right? Apes are not vocal learners. Humans are really
the only primate that, that, you know, has vocal
learning um where we can hear a new word
and pronounce it immediately. Um Apes can do that
with their, with their hands and their hands are
remarkably similar to humans. You know, if you see
a picture of a, of a Bonobo hand or
orangutan hand and a human hand, they're, I mean,
they're a little bit weird parts get stretched or
squished, but they're very similar. And, um, and yes,
humans have greater, um, greater control, greater dexterity over
their hands. But they move in largely similar ways.
And so, you know, apes can learn something like
American sign language. They do it in a kind
of, you know, in a not fully, uh sort
of, you know, articulated way. It would be like,
you know, if you had a speech impediment and
you were learning English or Portuguese
in the fluent way, then
what? Right. So, I just mean in terms of
their like pronunciation, you know, if they're doing, um
if they're doing a sign, um you know, like,
uh you know, like girl, right? They might do,
instead of extending the thumb and dragging it down,
they might just do their, their whole hand like
this, right? And so they, and so that the
sort of articulation, especially of like different fingers in
specific ways is sloppy basically. Um But they're still
able to learn and produce sign. So it's not,
it's not that the, the manual limit the, the
physiological limitations of the hand are not what's preventing
them from learning fluent sign language. Um It's what's
preventing them from pronouncing the signs correctly. But you
can be a fluent speaker who, you know, who
has a pronounced lisp, for example, and if apes
had humanlike minds, they could do that right. They
could, they could be fluent signers who, you know,
just had had pronunciation difficulties. But nevertheless, they were
putting together, you know, sentences and telling stories, they're
not doing that. So, so yes, there, there are
some physiological limitations in terms of how exactly precise
the movements can be. But I think it's really
the cognitive limitations um that are, are preventing them
from, from using a, a full form of human
language with all of the complex grammars. Um AND,
and even, you know, the, the kind of desires
to communicate certain things, you know, to tell stories
to, to tell jokes. Um THESE are, are things
that, that humans do everywhere in the world, no
matter what language you speak. Um YOU know, no
matter sort of sort of one, once you get
to, to be sort of close to adult, like
the question that I'm really interested in is like,
what do very young Children do? Because they they
aren't yet fluent speakers. And so can we see
some of those um those urges, those communicative urges.
Do kid, do you know, two year olds want
to tell stories? Because apes, even when they get
the, the, even when they acquire the communication system
of a two year old don't want to tell
stories in the same way. And so I think
that's a really interesting question that's fundamentally more about
cognition than it is about uh you know, about
physiology or biology.
So another question now, how do we know whether
ape gestures are intentional or not?
Yeah. So the Ape Chester community um starting starting
with Mike Tomasello and Joseph call borrowed and then
modified a set of criteria from um from researchers
who were studying very young human infants because you
can ask the same question about young human infants.
You know, if a baby goes, ah, how do
you know that like are those movements meaningful? Are
they trying to tell you something or are they
just, you know, gassy or uncomfortable or something? And
so, you know, uh in looking at, at any,
any being, including young Children where you can't ask
them what they mean. Um You have to try
to figure out other ways of, of measuring um
their, their intentions. Um And so, so this set
of criteria, at least the, the modified version that,
that we've adapted. I, I could myself in, in
the wii although I was not part of those
original studies. Um WE, the gestural community have, have
adapted for apes is um that we look for
meaning, we look for movements that are um first
we call non effective. And so that means that
the movement doesn't um doesn't achieve its own goal.
So if I want someone to move away, if
I shove them, it's not a gesture, it's an
action, I'm pushing them out of my way. But
if I tap them or I poke them or
I like, you know, touch them gently, um then
that would be something that is, you know, where
the movement is communicative rather than um you know,
where it's, it's communicating my goal rather than doing
the goal directly. Um So first, they have to
be non effective. Um They also need to be
directed towards another individual and I already talked a
little bit about that, right? That ape gestures, we
really only look at things that are communicating to
another individual rather than things that I might do
by myself. And that's where it differs from human
gesture. So um no effective um directed. And then
we start to look for evidence that the, the
ape has a goal in mind in their communication.
And so we do that in a couple of
different ways. We um we look for um for
evidence that um that when there isn't a response,
the ape continues their communication. So we look for
persistence. So if I do something, you know, say
I want you to move and I poke you
and you don't acknowledge me. Do I persist in
communicating? Right. That's good evidence that you have a
communicative goal or the ape has a communicative goal
and the, and it hasn't yet been met. Right.
So I keep doing stuff. Um The, the interesting
part I think is, you know, it is not
about, do I keep communicating. Um Right. I mean,
my dog keeps communicating a lot when there's, you
know, the mail person is delivering mail, but she
just does it in the same way over and
over and over and over and over and, and
I'm like, shut up. Ok. She's lovely. I love
her so much. She's the light of my life.
Um But, uh, but she's, you know, kind of
doing this that she's like, look, look, look, look,
look, look and what is what we're trying to
look for in apes is that they're not just
repeating the same thing over and over, but that
they're also elaborating, um, or, or, um, or exaggerating
or changing their signal. Right. So if, if I
want you to move and I poke you and
you don't move, I might poke you again, repetition,
but then I might change to something else. So,
you know, I might like tap you to get
your attention or I might like, you know, vocalize
as well or I might move if you're not
looking, I might move around in front of you
and then do something I might try pulling you,
I might lean on you and then tap you
and, and kind of throw other things into the
mix. So we look for evidence of elaboration of
persistence and elaboration. And then um in that example,
I just gave where I might move around in
front. That's another thing that we look for is
is sensitivity to the signal being received or being
able to be received. So again, we do this
in a couple of different ways. One is we
look for evidence that the apes are using um
potential gestures in modalities that are accessible to, to
the recipient. So if you're, if the recipient is
not looking right, if your back is turned to
me, I am not going to come up behind
you and go shoe, right? Um You can't see
me. Uh So if you're looking, I might do
a shoe gesture, but if you're not looking, I'm
either gonna use AAA vocalization, which we don't count
as a gesture or I could use what we
call an auditory gesture. So I could clap or
I could, you know, tap um you know, the
thing you're sitting on or, or something else. Um
OR I use a tactile gesture like a poke
to get your attention or a tap or, you
know, I nudge you. Um And, and when apes
uh when, when apes can't be seen by their
recipient, they'll either use tactile or auditory gestures or
they'll often walk around where they can be seen
and then use a visual gesture. So I think
that sensitivity to, to when they can and can't
be seen and adjusting their communication um is another
thing that we use as evidence of um of
intentionality. And then the last thing um is we
also use evidence that apes are expecting a response.
So, um we typically um the, where we used
to describe this as response waiting, it's not like
the most exciting term. But if I produce a
gesture, um you know, say I want you to
give me something and I hold my hand out.
Um IF you don't, you know, I, I will,
I will produce the gesture, but I'll wait. And
so you can do that either by a, with
a movement, final hold so I can produce the
gesture and then hold my hand there and wait
for you to respond or I can gesture and
then still stay looking at you and wait for
something to happen. And that's very different from, you
know, from going, hey, hey, hey, hey, hey, and
not kind of not checking to see if there's
a response. And so, um you know, I think
that the kinds of things that, that um we
see sometimes in the animal kingdom, um oftentimes uh
signals that we call broadcast signals, you know, a,
a bird goes up on top of a tree
and they're like, I'm singing, I'm singing, I'm singing,
I'm singing. They're just putting stuff out there. Right?
I mean, it's like tweeting, right? Literally. Um RIGHT
where you're, you're like, I'm putting stuff out there.
Maybe people will hear it, maybe they won't. Um
But you're not, you're not producing a signal and
then waiting, producing a signal and then waiting and,
and so you do see that sometimes in, in
other kinds of animal signals. So I'm not saying
that's only in gesture, but that's just a, a
piece of the puzzle is that, you know, you're,
you're producing a movement and then you're waiting to
see how the other will respond. And I think
that's again, kind of providing evidence that what they're
doing, the movements that they're doing are um are,
you know, intended to communicate, they have a specific
goal and they're anticipating a particular response.
Well, I don't know about other nonhuman primates or
apes, but I guess that if you repeat a
gesture without waiting for a response, at least in
humans, you might have the intention of annoying the
other person. So it might be still intentional.
That's, that's very fair. Actually, that's one of the
things we're looking at it in this new project
I'm working on, on teasing. So I do think
that, that, you know, this exactly like, hey, hey,
hey, um so, yeah, I, I agree. Yeah.
And then in 10 seconds, the other person will
turn the wrong things and, and say you're annoying
me. Yeah. So uh a another aspect of gestures
here. So when it comes again to apes, how
flexible are their gestures?
So I would say there, I mean, medium flexible,
uh I mean, I think they're, they're, we think
that they're more flexible than their vocalizations. Um I
would say they're less flexible than, than human gesture.
So there do seem to be, you know, there
are certain kinds of gestures that apes use um
to communicate different kinds of goals. So there are
set, you know, there are kinds of gestures that
apes use to initiate play with others. There's certain
kinds of gestures that apes use to um you
know, to display, maybe to threaten or, or to,
you know, to like seem big and show off.
Um However, we do see those gestures also in
other contexts and that's, that's important too that you,
you know, if you only have a g if
you have a gesture that you always use in
just one context, always in the same way, it's
very hard to say that, that you have any
control over it, right? It's, it's more likely to
be something that's quite reflexive, right? If it's like,
oh, every time, you know, I see Molly, uh
you know, and she's my friend, right? So like
every time I see Molly, I go, hi, sorry.
Right. Uh And I don't ever do anything different
and I never do this gesture in any other
context. It's very difficult to argue um without the
ability to interview someone that like this gesture is
um you know, is intentional that it's something that
I have control over. And that's fundamentally what intentional
is about. Right? And so I think, I think
that this question of flexibility is very important. So
I would say yes, ape gestures are flexible. Um
But, you know, I don't think, I think that,
that they probably don't have as a all from
what we see, they don't have as much flexibility
as uh over their gestures as humans do. Um
But they do seem to, to have gesture forms,
you know. Uh SO arm raises arm extensions, tapping
things poking. Um AND they use those gestures, those,
those underlying forms of gestures across a wide variety
of contexts and they modify them and combine them
with other forms of gesture in many different ways.
So when you mentioned their gestures being reflexive and
so the individual produces them not having particular control
over them. Does that have anything to do with
the gestures being innate or learned or not at
all?
Yeah. Uh Let me, so let me just clarify.
I don't think that ape gestures are, are reflexive.
Um So, yeah, so I just wanted to, to
be clear that um you know, I do think
ape gestures are intentional, they're not reflexes but um
you know, but some animal signals, um you know,
you, you look at sort of a classic example
of like the Darwin's like, Digger wasp, right? Um,
AND you have, you know, these examples of say,
insects who, like, will do the same behavior over
and over as long as you, you know, no
matter how many times they've done it before, as
long as you put the right stimulus in front
of them. And that's sort of what I mean
by like a reflex, right? You something where if
you have the, the form, you know, if you
sort of put the command into the computer system,
it produces the signal um without thinking and, and
I don't think that's what apes are doing. Um
But it's, it's an interesting question about biology, right?
About um what's inherited and what's learned. And so
ape gesture is a really tricky, um you know,
sort of topic in this area because the forms
of ape gestures seem to be very similar across
different groups of apes. They're very similar across species
of apes, um including us. So humans do a
lot of other fancy things. But we also seem
to have this kind of core set of movement
that are used by all of the Great apes.
You know, we extend our arms with our palms
up to request things, we throw our, our arms
away from our body to get others to go
away. Um You know, we like clap and tap
and wave to get attention. Uh AND So I
think one great question is, are though, is that
similarity in form due to a common biology? Um
YOU know, either within a species or also between
species um or is it due to similarities in
body forms? Right, you only have, you have like
10 things that can wiggle on two things that
can wiggle more on two things that can like
stretch out and come towards your body, but they
can only do those in a certain number of
ways. Um And so, you know, is it that
the sort of similarities in physiology are driving the
similarities in, in the form of the communication system
or is it, you know that we have inherited
forms, we, the great apes, all great apes have
inherited forms of gestures. Um Or could it also
be something to do with, with, you know, similar
social needs? And this, I think is a little
bit harder to explain across species, but I think
is a nice way to potentially explain similarities across
groups of the same species, you know, so if
you're, um you know, if you're in a chimpanzee
group and, you know, and you're in a zoo
and in Belgium compared to a chimpanzee group in
the wild in Uganda, um you're, you know, you
still have multiple males, multiple females, you have, you
know, juveniles, you probably have babies, babies want to
be picked up, other females want to, you know,
to like play with or interact with babies, you
have to communicate, you know. So, so there are
sort of a, a set of social goals, you
know, I want stuff, I want you to go
away. I want you to look at me. Um
So that, that set of social goals might sort
of common social goals might lead communication systems to
be more similar than we would expect just in
a random number generator. Um But I think that's
probably not the reason that great apes have, have
sort of similar forms of gestures. A lot of
the movements that they're producing look similar. Um I
think that there's probably biology involved. I don't know
whether all, I mean, I do not think that
all forms of grade a grade ape gesture are
biologically inherited. Um And, and so it might be
that it's sort of a constraint of the body.
Plus, you know, a certain, maybe an underlying like
movements away from the body or to push other
individuals away movements towards the body or to bring
them towards and then those kind of get mapped
onto similar physiological forms. And so you see common
uh common forms of gestures. That's a really big
question. I think no one has a great answer
for it. There are, are different. Um You know,
there are lots of different, well, not a lot,
there are a few different theories about how apes
acquire their gestures. I perhaps in a sort of
political slash theoretically weak position. Um Think that ape
gestures are not acquired all acquired via the same
mechanism. I think that there are some gestures are
probably socially learned, some are probably biologically inherited, some
are probably ritualized down from um from effective actions.
Um And so, uh just, I don't know if
we're gonna talk about that later, but just quickly
ritualized means sort of something that started out as
an effective movement, like I'm, you know, pull you
towards me and that over time, um you know,
you start as the recipient of that, of that
action, you start to realize what I'm trying to
do and you start to respond earlier and earlier
and earlier. And so what started out as I
grab you and pull you or put my arm
around you and pull you, um then turns into
something that, you know, goes from uh to uh
to uh to e right? And so, and, and
then the final movement, it can be something that's
just like come, come, come, come, come, come with
me, right? Um WHICH is very different from, all
right. I gotta take you and go over here.
Um The problem is that's a very difficult process
to observe because it, it happens over many, many
interactions over a lot of time. Um And, and
that's something that we, we believe is important in
the gestures of some of the gestures of human
Children as well as some of the gestures of
great apes. And so I, I think that that
ape gestures are acquired via uh uh you know,
a diversity of, of um of mechanisms. But one
final thing and then I promise I, I will
be quite an about this is that um it
seems like the forms of gestures are very similar
across species and across um groups of the same
species in different locations who've never met each other.
But it seems like the uses of gesture differ
much more than the forms. So you might have,
you know, the same shooing gesture. But in one
group, it, it tends to get combined with these
other signals or tends to get used in these
contexts. And in another group, it, it manifest, it's
used in different ways. So I do think that
there's more evidence that learning, whether it's social learning
or individual learning, I'm not, I'm not sure. Um
But I think that that learning um and potentially
culture plays a bigger role in the use of
ape gesture than it does in um in determining
the, the the physical forms
and do a gestures have specific meanings. And, and
by the way, what is the meaning in this
context exactly?
Uh WHAT is meaning? How many hours do we
have? Um So I, I think so, I mean,
yes, I, I think ape gestures, I think some
ape gestures have specific meanings. I think some, the
meaning is very flexible and you know, and it,
so just in the way that, you know, if
we have, you know, if I say, do human
words have meanings and you say absolutely. And I
say, OK, well, you know, like if you take
the words, um I, I mean, I don't know,
like storm, right? Like it can be, it can
be like a physical storm. It can also refer
to someone's mood, it can also refer, right? So
you, you can have things that yes, there is
sort of AAA me like there is a meaning
but it really differs, you know, based on the
context exactly what it means and you can use
it in, in non literal ways. Um And lots
of human words don't have, don't have very tight
meanings, right? So, I mean, like Dike Dick words,
I can say here and there and like the,
those are really like, yes, they mean things absolutely.
But uh what exactly they mean really depends on
the context. And um you know, and I think
that the same is probably true of ape gesture
and now I am not saying that ape gestures
are the same as words. So it'd be really
clear. But um they're similar in the way that
or is what I'm talking about is that they
have sort of a primary meaning that you think
about where it's like, yes, this gesture is used
to initiate play or this gesture is used to,
you know, to um get someone to follow you,
but they, they also sometimes get used in other
contexts or they, they, you know, might have, um,
sort of have a loose, like this is a
play adja like this, this is a play gesture
but it gets used in different ways within the
context of play. Um And so, you know, I
think for, you know, for example, I'll just, well,
I guess I could just offer you my coffee
cup or so, like, if I, if I, I'm
offering you something right? And I love how, whenever
I'm doing being an ape, I have to, like,
get down. But if I'm offering you something as
an ape, I don't know why it's like, ah,
um, then
do they have shorter neck?
I don't know. I think it's just my leg.
Oh, I'm acting now. Um, SO sorry. But, uh,
it's just how you, like, tell I'm switching into
like, oh, I'm being the atheist. So, uh, so
I give you, uh, so let's say I'm offering
you something sometimes, you know, that, I mean, that
can be, that can have many different meanings. It,
yes, it can be taken. But it can also
be, look at what I have, I could pull
it back. I could, I could be disingenuous. Um,
YOU know, I could be offering you something. Um,
YOU know, because I, you know, I want to
get rid of it. I could be offering you
something because I, you know, it's a high value
item and I want you to meet with me,
I could be offering you something because I want
you to see the thing I just got and
I'm not going to give it to you. And
so, you know, there are, I think that, that
yes, ape gestures have meanings. Um, BUT I think
they're not, you know, they don't, they're not always
constrained in like, meaning exactly the same thing each
time. I, I also think and, and just really
quickly, I just want to say that um just
because I like wrote a whole paper about this
recently. And so it's a particular bugbear of mine
is that um the ways that we study meaning
in animal communication are so different from the ways
that we study it in human language that I
think um you know, in order basically, in order
to demonstrate that an animal signal has meaning, whether
it's a vocalization or a gesture, we're looking for
evidence in order to prove, yes, this, this thing
has meaning we are often looking for evidence that
it has a reliable response, right? So the animal
does this, the signaler, does this, the recipient, you
know, the signaler does A, the recipient does B
we want the recipient to do B A bunch
of times in order to argue that A has
the meaning, request B, right? Um The problem with
that is that then we conclude that animal signals
are very inflexible. You know, we we argue that
like, oh animal signals are very different from language
because they have this simple code system where I
do, you know where I use this signal and
this, I it always gets this response. But that's
also the way that we're structuring our questions. It's
what we're looking for. And so I get very
irritated, not at you, you're wonderful. But at this
like idea that, you know, the animal communication is,
is fundamentally different from human communication because it has
this 1 to 1 correspondence between what the signaler
does and what the recipient does when most of
our studies have been designed specifically to look for
that. And so I'm not saying that it's impossible
that animal communication is like that. But I think
that the way that we're asking questions about animals
affords those types of those types of answers and
really excludes the, the possibility that they're using them
in, in much more flexible, creative, um you know,
human like ways.
So the last thing that you just mentioned there,
I was actually earlier when I was about to
interrupt you, I was going to ask you, uh
and I guess that you've already answered the question,
but just to see if you have anything else
to add to it. But uh I was going
to ask you actually how you go about distinguishing
uh a gesture that has no meaning from a
gesture with a specific meaning.
Yeah. Um So with, I mean, with nonhuman great
apes. Um It's hard to argue that gestures have
no meaning because, I mean, there's certainly gestures where
we're saying, like, we don't know what the meaning
is. Um And there are gestures where we say
we're pretty confident, we know what this means. Um
It's, it's harder for us to sort of call
something to like, conclude that something is a gesture
if there, if we don't have any evidence that
it means something. Um uh JUST because it's hard
to ask, you know, and, and again, this is,
I think where the, the human gesture researchers and
the ape gesture researchers would differ in terms of
like human gesture researchers would say like it's a
movement, it happens while you're, you know, while you're
talking with other individuals, it's a gesture with apes,
we don't have that luxury, right? They're not engaged
in conversation like the gesture is the conversation. And
so in a way you have to say, well,
you know, what are they communicating in order to
argue that the movement they're doing is a gesture.
So it gets a, I mean, the intentionality criteria
that I talked about are not about meaning. So
it, it, at least that's really nice. It's clean,
we can say, you know, it's not effective, it's
directed, they're repeating, they're elaborating. But um you know,
but sometimes it, it gets, it's tricky for us
to sort of say like this is clearly its
own gesture. When we don't have evidence that um
that it's, it's communicating something in particular. And so
that's where I think this, this, like we just
need to be uh transparent about the fact that
the, the ways we're studying ape gesture and human
gesture are very different. And um and there are
researchers who are trying to, to work around that.
Um And really trying, it's harder to study apes
in the same way that you study humans. Um
But there are people who are trying now to
study humans in the way that we study apes.
And I think when you do that, you see
many more similarities um than, than differences. Um But
in terms of, of how do you differentiate between
a gesture that has a clear meaning and a
gesture that has, I won't say no meaning. I'll
say a less clear meaning it, you know, is,
is, you know, you want to look for uh
kind of a match between what the recipient is
doing and um and when the signaler stops gesturing,
right? So if I like poke you and you
don't do anything and I poke you, you don't
do anything and I poke you and then you
move away. Um And then I stop communicating. That's
like one data point that suggests that the, the
poke is um either the, the goal and that's
the meaning of the poke is, is to move,
right? The same thing if I'm doing a like
you know, a, a beckon, right. I'm like, ah,
you know, come here, come here, come here. Um,
AND we try to, as ape researchers, we try
to not like gloss things as, oh, it, it
means come here, right? You wanna build that evidence
up from the, from the bottom up. Um And
so, you know, we see this arm swing towards
the body and another individual comes over and then
the ape stops producing that signal and stops, you
know, stops communicating. Um Maybe they switch to grooming,
maybe they do something else, but we use um
the, the sort of what the recipient does that
makes the signaler stop communicating as evidence of um
of meaning. And it, you know, it's important that
it isn't just once, right? So we, and that's
that, you know, because like you do it once
it could be, you know, like you were saying,
if I poke you a bunch and you turn
around and yell at me, it's like, get the
heck off, right? Like that's probably not the meaning
of the gesture. And so it's important that, you
know, as researchers, we gather lots and lots of
examples and we look across them to see um
you know, to see like what across many examples,
what um are the most frequent behaviors that cause
the, the signaler to stop signaling. And um and
then, you know, for some gestures, 95% of the
time, it'll be the same thing and we think
about those as gestures that have very tight or
very strong meanings, right? This gesture is used to
get this thing to happen. Sometimes it doesn't happen.
The other individual ignores them or goes away or
whatever. But you know, when there is a response
that causes them to stop, it's almost always this
thing, other gestures are used much more flexibly. And
so maybe, you know, 20% of the time the
other individual goes away, 20% of the time they
come towards you, 20% of the time they start
grooming. 5% of the time they share an object
with you, 5% of the time it initiates mating,
you know. So there, so there are gestures that
um, that have seem to have much more flexible
meanings and that they result in a lot of
different outcomes that um that sort of satisfy or,
or apparently satisfy the signaler.
Well, I guess that perhaps uh you, people who
study gestures in nonhuman apes should be a little
bit more ambitious. And when you teach them sign
language, you should also try to teach them philosophy
and then you would be able to ask them
directly if their gestures have any meaning or not.
Ah, why didn't I think of that
even though perhaps it would later on raise some
ethical questions because if you teach them philosophy, they
might start to, to think about their own existence
and then start to feel existential rather and think
about death and all of that, which would ruin
their mental health.
Uh Absolutely. Yeah.
So uh let's get now a little bit into
language then. So in what ways do gestures relate
to uh language? I mean, are there features of
gestures that are shared with human language, for example?
Yeah. So when you, when you say gestures there,
do you, do you want me to talk about
the ways in which ape gesture might be similar
to human language? Or do you want me to
talk about human gestures and how they like are
an integrative part of,
let's go with ape gestures. I'm more interested here
in the phylogenetic aspect of these.
Cool. Yeah, because I mean, uh to answer the
thing you didn't ask um just to, just to
say, I do think that that human gesture is
very much part of human language. So I think
that that speech and gesture together are really like
part of a multimodal system that manifests in different
ways where like speech, you know, has particular rules
and is much more digital gesture is much more
analog. It is, you know, more holistic, it's more
imagistic and, and I think that those systems coming
together is actually like part of what makes human
language very powerful and very different as a system.
Um But um you know, in terms of similarities
between ape gestures and human language, um so they,
you know, we, I think there's much more evidence
that apes combine gestures um together. They don't, they
don't seem to do it according to syntactic rules.
So, you know, um so, I mean, no one
has found evidence of that. They did. It would
be a nature paper, it would be very exciting.
Um But they combine gestures together in sequences and
um and those sequences tend to, to show, you
know, like I said, persistence and elaboration, things like
that. Um But uh you know, but they're not
isolated signals, I think in that way that, you
know, those are sort of more language like. Um
AND they, you know, they are very flexible and
I think that that's really the part where, you
know, the, the thing that attracts a lot of
people to study gesture is that, you know, they,
they seem to be able to, you know, to
use them in ways to overcome communicative um you
know, hurdles, right? So, uh an early experiment I
did uh looked at the ways in which captive
apes. Again. We, we sort of, I've been talking
about like apes in general, but there's, you know,
there are people that study apes in captivity and
people that study them in the wild and their
gestures seem to be pretty similar, but they're, their
social needs, their social structures. Um And the kinds
of things that they communicate about seems to be
very, I mean, well, not seems to be, is
very different, right? You have animals that are trying
to survive and you have animals that are sitting
around being fed, basically, like watching television and poking
each other, which I would argue is much more
like modern humans. But, um, you know, we're all
sort of thrown in together and, you know, just
finding ways to occupy our time. Um Anyway, uh
So, um, what was your actual question? Sorry, that
image just like,
no, sure, no worries. It was if the, whether
there are aspects or features of the not but
tape gestures and human language that they share.
Yeah, absolutely. Um Yeah. So, so, right. So I
talked a little bit about flexibility. Um You know,
they, they seem to, to combine them um in
potentially interesting ways. Uh So, one of the, the
first experiments that I did was was looking at
how apes um communicate when they've sort of met
their communicative or sorry, how they communicate when uh
a human experiment experimenter appears to misunderstand versus only
partially understand. Um And so, in this experiment, uh
you know, we had, um we had the experimenter
give the apes, either part of the thing that
they were requesting or give them the wrong thing.
And then we wanted to see what apes did
in response and we found different patterns in how
they, and you know how they gestured and how
they tried to communicate and they weren't vocalizing. Sometimes
they were making noises with their mouths and they
were like blowing raspberries or kind of smacking their
lips. But, you know, mostly they were gesturing um
either with auditory gestures or visual gestures. Um We,
we don't, we don't usually have tactile gestures between
apes and, and zookeepers that can be problematic. So,
um so in this case, you know, we found
that in these two very different situations where they're
either getting the thing, they, um they're, they're not
getting anything they want. So it's like they're requesting
a banana and they get an onion versus they
were the banana and they get a little piece
of the banana. We found that the kind of
uh the patterns of their communication were very different
following getting an onion and getting a little piece
of a banana. And, and so even though there
doesn't seem to be any syntactic structure, there's still
strategic combination, right? They're, they're using their signals in
strategic ways to overcome miscommunication. Um And I think
that that's sort of an interesting suggestion that there
might be um there might be a, a range
of different um sort of um strategic uh pathways
to have communicative complexity that isn't just syntax. So,
you know, the sort of syntactic rules that we
see in human language are amazing. I mean, they
allow language, they allow us to take this finite
number of things and communicate about an infinite number
of possibilities, right? By combining them in different ways
like a Rubik's Cube um Apes don't seem to
have that, but they nevertheless seem to be able
to use a limited number of gestures, a limited
number of movements and they, they are able to,
to combine those to communicate, um, you know, with
other individuals in novel situations, to achieve their social
goals. Those social goals are more limited than, than
humans. Right? We're not like they're not trying to
build universities, teach each other recipes, um, you know,
make up bedtime stories. But, um, you know, but
they're still able to, to achieve their social goals
um, in oftentimes, um quite flexible uh ways that,
that involve using, combining different signals, um paying attention
to what the other individ, what the, the recipient
understands and doesn't understand. Right. Do you are, you
know, did you, did you get me, did you
sort of get me? Um, AND whether the other
individual is paying attention? So I think that this
like social monitoring of the other individual, the potential
for theory of mind, which we haven't talked about.
But, but I do think it's sort of there
in the background with him with ape gesture. Um
What do I know about your mind? Do you
understand me? Do you know that I'm trying to
communicate to you? Do I know that, you know
that I'm trying to communicate? Right? It's all of
those kinds of, of you can go on and
on and on. But, but fundamentally it's what do
I understand about your mind and I think that
apes are different from humans, but I think they're
a lot closer than, than, you know, people used
to think. Um, YOU know, I, I do think
that they understand something about intentions, they understand something
about others goals, they understand things about what surprises
other individuals and they can use that to their
benefit. Um FOR good or for evil, they can
like, manipulate other individuals. Um BUT they, they can
also console and be quite empathetic. Um And I
mean, just as humans can. And so I think,
you know, this is a way in which humans
are kind of a supercharged primate. We really think
a lot about other individuals. That's why we have
soap operas, right? We spend a lot of time
and we're fascinated by like what other individuals want,
what they're doing, what they're thinking like humans as
a species are like a super supercharged ape. And
I think what's interesting is to look at the
other apes and figure out the ways in which
um you know, we, we see commonalities in the
sort of basic forms of our cognition, but also
our communication.
And so to go back to one of the
points we made early in our conversation when I
asked you or, or basically I mentioned that probably
gestures are not, are not used simply to convey
information to others, but also to a one's own
cognition. So in what ways can our usage of
gestures aid our own cognition.
Yeah. So, um I mean, there's so many, we
could talk for an hour, you know, for an
hour. I mean, a lot of, um so there
are several theories about this um in terms of
why gesture might aid our cognition, but I, I
can just sort of talk for, you know, a
minute or two about like the different areas in
which we think it does. Um So gesture certainly
helps speech. It helps you speak more fluently. It
helps you. Uh YOU know, it helps, you have
fewer pauses, helps you have fewer ums and us.
So there's a, you know, really, really nice experiments
that show that when you restrict people's gesturing. So
like if I sat on my hands, I mean,
I, I could do this, you know, live on
your show, but I'm not going to, I like
gesturing. But, you know, if you restrict your gesturing,
you will, you'll make more mistakes in speech, you'll
pause more, you'll go um uh uh you, you'll
also, you'll have more disfluencies and a disfluency is
what I just did. I said you'll also, you'll
have more disfluencies, right? And so it's like I
start, and then I start a different thing or
I say half a word and then I erase
it. So, um so gesturing helps you speak more
smoothly. It helps you speak more coherently. Uh It's,
it helps you remember words. If you're like, I'm
thinking of this word and I can't remember it.
And I'm like, uh and, and you see this
kind of like I'm sorting through things, gesture, people
do that a lot. Um One of the, the
best ways to think about uh whether gesture helps
speaker fluency is to look at people gesturing when
they're on the telephone. And so, you know, and
when they can't be seen, right? I am clearly
if I am on the phone and I am
talking to someone and, you know, we're not using
facetime or zoom, my gestures are not for you.
But what's fascinating is that those gestures actually are
sort of for you because they make my speech
better, they make it, they, you know, they, I
make more sense. I'm, you know, my speech is
smoother, it doesn't have as many pauses. Um It,
you know, it, it has more like musicality, right?
And so, um so the, the ways in which
gesture uh sort of integrates with and supports speech
can be present even if you can't see my
gestures and that, and I think that's really fascinating.
So that's about sort of gesture as part of
communication, even when you can't see the gestures. Um
And I think the communication, the aid to communication,
there is both for the person who's communicating, but
also for the other person. And um then I
think there's a whole body of work that looks
at how gestures can help learners. So they can
help, you know, they can help while you're learning
something, they can help you. Um WHEN you're processing
that information, they can help you remember things. And
so there's a whole body of work looking at
gestures and educational contexts and um that's both learning
from the gestures of others. So how do Children
learn from teachers, gestures? And you know, it seems
to be, it's, it's quite important. And so there,
there's a lot of, you know, their interventions where,
where people are, you know, changing the ways in
which teachers use gesture as a visual aid and
seeing does that in, in what context does that
help Children learn more than not getting gestures or
getting some visual aid that isn't gesture? Um And
most of that research is in math education. And
then there's, there's also research that looks at how
the gestures that Children are producing. It's usually, it's
usually Children just, you know, I think sort of
the majority of educational research is on Children, but
it's also true of adult learners, how do the
gestures that learners themselves are producing? Um How does
that help? Um But how does that help them
learn? And um you know, and, and I think
that initial work in that area really showed that
the ways in which Children are gesturing can, can
provide insight about where they are in their learning
process. So um there's a beautiful set of studies
uh by um Susan Gold Meadow and and her
colleagues that look at um what are what are
called Piagetian conservation conservation tasks. Um They're like page
uh famous scientist who had developed these tasks. So
um there are cases where children's gestures will differ
from like what you see, Children gesturing about will
differ from what they say in speech. And so
when that happens, children's gestures tend to be right.
And that even when their speech is wrong. And
so what's really interesting is that Children who are
in this space where their hands are saying one
thing and their mouth is saying something else, those
Children are more sort of ready to learn, they're
like almost figuring it out. Um But they don't
realize it. And so that, and so that is
actually a great way to get insight about, you
know, when learners are like about to get something,
you know, maybe that's a point where you could
give them some additional support. You could, you could
intervene in a way that would help get them
um to there, you know, so in, in one
conservation task, there's um two rows of, of little
stones or markers and, and then one and then
the experimenter spreads one of them out and then
you ask the child which one has more, right?
And Children will like uh below a certain age
though, even though they have the same number of
stones, um because they're longer, Children will say, you
know, this row has more um, and if you
have a whole group of Children, all of whom
say that one has more. If you look at
children's hands, they're actually split into two groups. See
some Children will take their finger and they'll go,
that one has more and you're like, wait, but
you just counted them, you know, um, and you
know, you match them up 1 to 11 to
11 to 1 and that's how you solve the
task. But children's hands figure that out before their
mouths do. And what's interesting is that those hands
can, can help, you know, I think the possibility
is that your hands can help your brain figure
out things that then you communicate to your mouth.
And so, uh, I realize it's a very simplistic
way of saying that. But, um, uh, you know,
but I, I think that this is true, you
know, you can see that in your own life
where you're, you're thinking or I certainly can, I
gesture a lot as you can tell. But, um,
you know, but where I will oftentimes be thinking
about something and I'll kind of, you know, put
ideas out and move them around or think about
them. And sometimes I look at my hands and
I go, oh, right. And it's like, yeah, I
think, you know, and, and it's like I'm trying
to work something out and then by doing the
action and by seeing the action, I then get
new insight into it. And so this is something
that, you know, that manifests itself in many different
ways in conversation, but also in, you know, in
different kinds of learning or practice.
Well, you mentioned uh Susan Golden Medal and I'm
actually about to interview her soon, soon.
Hey, Susan is amazing. She's the
best about her book thinking with your hands. So
I guess that will get more into these kinds
of questions. So uh so I have two more
questions for you today then. Um THE first one
is, how do you look at the future of
gesture research? I mean, what kinds of questions would
you like to see tackled or answered?
Yeah, I mean, I would love to see and
I think I alluded to this a little bit
earlier with, you know, talking about the um sort
of do ape gestures have meanings. I mean, I
would really love to see sort of a, I
don't wanna say breaking away from, but an opening
up of the way that people think about meaning
that we ask questions about meaning um in, in
nonhuman animals broadly, but in, in ape gesture specifically
to me because, you know, that's the area I
work in. And I think, you know, we, we've
for so long been trying to look for one
ape does something, another ape responds, you know, A
to B A to B A to B and
that's great. It's really important fundamental work. Um But
if we're also really interested in flexibility, we need
to kind of expand out from that to think
about the rare cases, to think about the, the
things we can't explain. And I think in, in
some ways the stuff we can't explain which oftentimes
we just say, well, we excluded these other things
because they're always too complicated, you know, three party
interactions or, you know, cases where you use a
gesture out of context and you're like, but, but
isn't that part of the date? Right? And I
mean, I, I do this myself, I'm not trying
to say that like other people are doing bad
work. I think all the work is, has been
really important to building up a science of ape
gesture. But I think now that we have a
science, I think it frees us up to, to
ask potentially, you know, harder questions um that, that
break away from, you know, simple A to B
structures. I'm really excited about that possibility. I think
it's really important. Um One of the things I
would love to, to look at personally and I
hope others will look at is um you know,
are things about non literal um gesture and in
particular play, I'm very interested in communicative play. So
how, you know, and we, we have always looked
at at gestures that initiate play, but we never
think about the gestures themselves as being play. So
that's something that we know is incredibly important in
humans. It's, you know, especially important in human Children
who, and we often are comparing the gestural systems
of human Children because they don't yet know language
to ape um the gestures of great apes who
also don't know language but, but aren't gonna learn
language. And so, um so what we see in
human Children is they use gestures in many creative,
spontaneous, playful, nonserious, weird ways. Um THEY also use
them in many serious ways. But, but right now
I'm interested in, in what happens outside of the
predictable. And that's something that's been really hard for
us to, to look at an ape communication. Um
Because we've been trying to prove that there, you
know, there are predictable interesting ways, right? We've been
trying to say ape gesture is a thing. Yes,
it has meanings. Yes. You know, it has intentional
meanings. Yes. Uh But now that we've said that
hopefully, I think we can, we can kind of
take it for granted and start to look at
the things that, that are not part of that
expected structural intentional system, um which I think might
lead us to some, some more interesting insights about
how apes might be learning, might be playing, might
be uh you know, communicating with one another in,
in unexpected ways and might be even uh using
gesture to think in addition to communicate.
So, does that connect to your project on whether
ape apes have humor or not?
Uh I ate a little bit, I think. Um,
AND yeah, and I mean, thanks for bringing that
up. I know that's sort of like my new
project that's, that's just coming out now. Um, I,
uh, so potentially, I mean, we haven't, so I
haven't yet done the thing that, you know, I
want to do with, with looking at, at communicative
play. But, but this project on, on, uh, playful
teasing, sort of, you know, humor adjacent. I try
not to use the word humor just because, um
you know, because it's a very loaded term and
I think people have a lot of, of intuitions
about what it means. And so I try to
use like
it might offend comedians.
Exactly. You know, everyone's worried that A I is
coming for their jobs and the comedians will be
like the apes are coming for years, buddy. So,
um I, I don't think that's gonna happen anytime
soon, but, but I do, uh I do think
that uh that, that looking at playful teasing and
sort of joking behavior in, in great apes um
is, is something, is a space where we can
look for more flexibility. Um We can kind of
build on some of the things that we've done
in ape gesture. And that's actually where I started
with the project was to take gestural coding systems
and apply them to interactions that, you know, weren't
necessarily gestural um to, you know, take the, the
criteria of intentionality, looking for per repetition and persistence
and directed behavior. Um But then, you know, sort
of broaden that and, and look for uh sort
of, you know, we created other criteria and, and
things that we were looking for as well, but,
but to focus on interactions where one ape seems
to be provoking another, uh but in a, in
a playful way. And so I was really focusing
on um on the playful side of teasing rather
than the aggressive and bullying side of teasing. And
that's something where um it where I think the
the cognition underlying that uh underlying those interactions might
be very uh illuminating about what one Ape understands
about another ape's mind. So do they understand what's
going to be surprising to them? Do they understand
what's gonna push them too far? Do they understand
what they're going to um you know, what's going
to get a rise out of them? Um And,
and I think that that teasing is a really
interesting area because it's, it's kind of dangerous, right?
It's in this gray area between being nice and
being mean and you absolutely can have mean teasing.
I think it's very important to be clear about
that. I'm not saying all teasing is nice but
teasing when it happens in a closer relationship. Um
LIKE the teasing between a parent and an infant
or the teasing that happens in flirting, for example,
um you know, the or between close friends, those
kinds of teasing. Um YOU know, can tell you
a lot about the social relationships and it can
also be potentially. And this is what I'm, I
argue in our new work, it can be a,
an opportunity to learn about the strength of your
relationship with that other individual and also potentially to,
to build that relationship and to strengthen it. And
so, um so, yeah, I think this is, this
is something where it's not, I'm not specifically looking
at gestures within teasing, but I'm very interested in
looking at teasing as its own behavior um as
a as a site to, to study the social
cognition of um of great apes and potentially other
species. I mean, my, my whole goal in this
new project was to kind of argue that that
teasing, the playful teasing was a thing that teasing
wasn't always bad and that it is its own
behavior that's different from play and different from, from
aggressive teasing. And then I think hopefully more people
will become interested in and we can get more
data about what other apes are doing about what
other species are doing. Um YOU know, about what,
you know, humans are doing in societies around the
world and hopefully to, to develop uh you know,
a sort of serious science of, you know, a
nonserious behavior.
Great. So hopefully this will also serve as a
teaser to our future second interview to talk more
about this point.
Very, very happy. It has been really a delight.
So,
yeah. So just before we go, would you like
to tell people where they can find you when
you work on the internet?
Uh, ABSOLUTELY. I am, I am not on, on,
you know, what used to be Twitter. Um, ALTHOUGH
I probably should be, but maybe I will do
that in the future. You can always look for
my last name is weird. So you can always
look for me. Um I, I'm just moved to,
to Indiana University, so I haven't gotten my lab
website up and running yet. But, um, if you
look for my name in Indiana, um you'll find
my lab website by the time this comes out.
And, um, and uh hopefully we'll also have some
new social media um along with that as well.
And one thing I just do before we end
is um separate from my lab. I also run
um, coun uh with my husband, uh the Diverse
Intelligences Summer Institute. And so that's something I would
love people to, to check out. So we run
a, a summer institute for three weeks every year
in Scotland. Um And you can check our website
out at um D CD I si.org.
Great. So, Doctor Cartmill, thank you so much again
for taking the time to come on the show.
It's been really fun to talk to you.
Thank you so much. I really appreciate it. I
have a great time and um, Yeah, I, I
look forward to, to seeing more of more of
your work and um hopefully talking again in the
future.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights Learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perera Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitting
Bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mark Nevs calling in Holbrook Field, Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Herz
J and Lain Jung Y and the K Hes
Mark Smith J Tom Hummel Sran, David Wilson, the
La de Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte
Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt Pavlo Stass, Nale Me,
Gary G Alman Sam of Zaypj Barboza, Julian Price
Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry Franca Lati Gilon
Cortez or Solis Scott Zachary ftw Daniel Friedman, William
Buckner, Paul Giorgino, Luke Loki, Georgio, Theophano, Chris Williams
and Peter Wo David Williams Di Costa Anton Erickson,
Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore
Larry Dey junior, Old Einon Starry Michael Bailey. Then
Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn. Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul
Barnabas, Radis Mark Temple, Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris
to Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert Jessica. No, Linda Brendan,
Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis Valentine Steinman,
Perros, Kate Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar
Masoud Ali Mohammadi Perpendicular Jan Urla. Good enough, Gregory
Hastings David Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers is
our web, Jim Frank Luca Toni, Tom Vig and
Bernard N Cortes Dixon, Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carlman, Negro, Nick Ortiz and
Nick Golden. And to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender,
Sergi, Adrian Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for
all.